.TH formatForBackup 1
.SH NAME
\fBformatForBackup\fR - Formats a storage-device for use in a backup-strategy.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBformatForBackup.bash\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIdevice-name\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Formats the specified storage-device with a \fBBtrfs\fR-filesystem on a \fBLUKS\fR storage-volume.
.IP \(bu
The use of \fBBtrfs\fR permits snapshots to be used to record previous versions of a backup.
.IP \(bu
The use of \fBLUKS\fR enables the whole device to be encrypted to safe-guard the user's data should the storage-device be lost.
.IP \(bu
\fIdevice-name\fR can be merely a partition on a storage-device rather than the whole device.
.IP \(bu
The "\fB/dev/\fR" device-prefix is optional.
.IP \(bu
N.B.: this executable doesn't perform the backup; this role is defined in the \fBmakefile\fR provided as part of this product.
.IP \(bu
CAVEAT: all data previously recorded on the referenced device/partition, will be lost.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-v\fR
Verbose: produces additional output where available.
.TP
\fB-d\fR \fIdevice-name\fR
The name of the device to which the decrypted storage-volume should be temporarily mapped; this value has little significance.
.br
Default "\fBdecrypted\fR".
.TP
\fB-f\fR \fIfilesystem-label\fR
The label to be assigned to the new filesystem.
This will affect the directory under which the OS automatically mounts the filesystem.
.br
Default "\fBBackup\fR".
.TP
\fB-c\fR \fIchecksum-algorithm\fR
The checksum-algorithm used by the new filesystem.
.br
See \fBman -s5 btrfs\fR for options.
.br
Default "\fBblake2\fR".
.TP
\fB-b\fR \fIsubvolume-name\fR
The name of the subvolume in which to record the backup.
.br
Default "\fBDocuments\fR"; which merely reflects the location under my home directory in which I store personal files, but it doesn't need to.
.TP
\fB-s\fR \fIsubvolume-name\fR
The name of the subvolume in which to record snapshots; this value has little significance.
.br
Default "\fB.snapshots\fR".
.TP
\fB-u\fR \fIuser-name\fR
The name of the user whose data will be backed-up.
.TP
\fB-g\fR \fIgroup-name\fR
The default group (as defined in "\fB/etc/passwd\fR") of the user whose data will be backed-up.
.SS "Generic Program-information"
.TP
\fB-?\fR
Displays help & then exits.
.SH EXIT-STATUS
\fB0\fR on success, & >\fB0\fR if an error occurs.
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP
$ \fBformatForBackup.bash -v sdb\fR	# The typical scenario where \fB/dev/sda\fR contains the OS & \fBsdb\fR is then assigned to the first USB storage-device inserted. The '/dev/' path-prefix is assumed.
.nf
[sudo] password for root:
WARNING!
========
This will overwrite data on /dev/sdb irrevocably.

Are you sure? (Type 'yes' in capital letters): YES
Enter passphrase for /dev/sdb: 
Verify passphrase: 
Enter passphrase for /dev/sdb: 
btrfs-progs v5.14 
See http://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org for more information.

Label:              Backup
UUID:               a6e9ef01-109f-408e-94d2-21fed649c75a
Node size:          16384
Sector size:        4096
Filesystem size:    7.45GiB
Block group profiles:
  Data:             single            8.00MiB
  Metadata:         DUP             256.00MiB
  System:           DUP               8.00MiB
SSD detected:       no
Zoned device:       no
Incompat features:  extref, skinny-metadata
Runtime features:   
Checksum:           blake2
Number of devices:  1
Devices:
   ID        SIZE  PATH
    1     7.45GiB  /dev/mapper/decrypted

Create subvolume './Documents'
Create subvolume './.snapshots'
.fi
.P
N.B.: the root password is requested, then the encryption password is requested several times.
.P
On successful termination, the formatted device will be unmounted & can be safely removed.
.P
When next connected, the specified symmetric encryption password will be requested.
.br
CAVEAT: depending on your desktop-environment, a keyring-password may also be requested to enable the encryption password to be cached.
.br
Once decrypted & mounted, the product's \fBmakefile\fR can be installed to implement the backup-process,
& this requires a local \fBexclusions.txt\fR file containing globs of any files which the user doesn't want included in the backup.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Dr. Alistair Ward.
.SH BUGS
.SS "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <\fBflashback@functionalley.com\fR>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2023 Dr. Alistair Ward
.PP
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program. If not, see <\fBhttps://www.gnu.org/licenses/\fR>.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IP \(bu
Home-page: <\fBhttps://functionalley.com/Storage/flashback.html\fR>.
.IP \(bu
<\fBhttps://github.com/functionalley/Flashback\fR>.
.IP \(bu
<\fBhttps://github.com/functionalley/Flashback/blob/master/makefile\fR>.
.IP \(bu
<\fBhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Btrfs\fR>.
.IP \(bu
<\fBhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_Unified_Key_Setup\fR>.
